Reference repository generators
===============================

This directory contains the input files and scripts needed for generating:

- The Reference API ie. the JSON files that are served by the Grid'5000 API for describing nodes, network equipments, topology ...

  Ex: $ curl -k https://api.grid5000.fr/sid/sites/nancy/clusters/graoully/nodes/graoully-1.json?pretty
  See also: https://www.grid5000.fr/mediawiki/index.php/API_all_in_one_Tutorial

- The OAR properties ie. the node information that is registered in OAR databases and 
  allows user to select resources matching their experiment requirements.

  Ex: $ oarsub -p "wattmeter=’YES’ and gpu=’YES’ and eth10g=’Y’"

- The configuration files of the following puppet modules: bindg5kb, conmang5k, dhcpg5k, kadeployg5k and lanpowerg5k.

See also: https://www.grid5000.fr/mediawiki/index.php/Reference_Repository.

General Design
--------------

For the general design discussion, see:
* https://www.grid5000.fr/mediawiki/index.php/CT-114_DesignRepoAPI (25/10/2015)
* [CT-grid5000] Proposition de réorganisation des outils autour de la ref API (16/10/2015)
* git clone git@gitolite.g5kadmin:slide -> 2016-03-29-IJD-Seminar-JG/

Requirements
------------
Ruby 2.1 (+ HashDiff and Net/SSH for the oar-generator; + peach and ruby-cute for run-g5kchecks; + hash_validator for the input validators)

Here is an example for creating a ruby setup with RVM (https://rvm.io/), gemset and bundle:
$ \curl -sSL https://get.rvm.io | bash -s stable --ruby
$ source ~/.rvm/scripts/rvm
$ rvm install 2.1
$ rvm gemset create ref-repo-dev
$ rvm gemset use ref-repo-dev
$ bundle install

Input files
-----------

Input files are stored in the input/ directory.

A ruby script loads the YAML files in a global hashtable. The file paths are used as entry points to the hashtable.
# sites/nancy/clusters/pomme/pomme.yaml.erb
nodes:
  pomme-1:
  ib0:
    ip: 172.18.70.11

becomes:

hash = {"sites"=>
        {"nancy"=>
         {"clusters"=>
          {"pomme"=>
           {"nodes"=>
            {"pomme-1"=>
             {"ib0"=> {"ip"=> "172.18.70.11"} }
        } } } } } }

The input file loader (lib/input_loader.rb) also supports coalesced key names:

pomme-[1-4]:
  performance:
    core_flops: 3929000000
    node_flops: 7440000000

and for more complex use case, YAML can be generated with ERB:

# input/sites/nancy/clusters/pomme.yaml.erb
nodes:
  <% (1..16).each { |i| %>
  pomme-<%= i %>:
    ib0:
      ip: 172.18.70.<%= i + 10 %>
  <% } %>

Updating the node input files using g5k-checks
----------------------------------------------

Node files (input/grid5000/sites/*/clusters/*/nodes/*.yaml) are generated by g5k-checks and should not be edited manually.
- You can use run-g5kchecks/run-g5kchecks.rb for updating those files.
- Node files of input/ are slightly edited compared to the raw output of `g5k-checks -m api`.
  => Use run-g5kchecks/postprocessing.rb for applying the mandatory modifications to the g5k-checks ouput.

See also:
* https://www.grid5000.fr/mediawiki/index.php/G5k-checks
* https://github.com/grid5000/g5k-checks/

Reference API Generator
-----------------------

The Reference API generator reads the input/ YAML files and generates the data/ JSON files.

Usage: cd reference-api/; ruby reference-api.rb

Updating the OAR properties
---------------------------

The generator can show the differences between the reference-repo and the OAR servers databases:

workstation$ ruby oar-properties.rb -d -n graphene-105 -vv

Output format: [’~’, ’key’, ’old value’, ’new value’]
  graphene-105:
    ["~", "disktype", "sata", "SATA II"]
    ["~", "eth10g", nil, false]
    ["~", "ib10g", false, true]
    ["~", "ib10gmodel", "none", "MT26418"]
    ["~", "ib40g", nil, false]
    ["~", "ib40gmodel", nil, "none"]

You can run the script per site, cluster or node using the -s, -c and -n options. There are several verbose levels (-v, -vv, -vvv).
After reviewing the changes, you can update the configuration of the OAR server:

workstation$$ ruby oar-properties.rb -d -n graphene-105 -e

The previous command will *execute* the oarnodesetting/oar_resources_add/oarproperty commands needed for updating the OAR database via SSH. For example, it will execute:
g5kadmin@oar.nancy$ oarnodesetting -h graphene-104 -p disktype='SATA II' -p eth10g='NO' -p ib10gmodel='MT26418'

If you do not want to run the script directly on the OAR server, you can also print the commands out by using the -o (--output) option in place of -e (--execute).

With the -d (--diff) option, the script fetches the OAR resources description from the OAR API. If you remove this option, the generator
simply creates a script for setting up every node properties (even those that might already be set correctly). There is a safeguard for not adding a node twice to an OAR database.
You can also use cache files (-d oarnodes-%s.yaml) if you do not want to retrieve the OAR configuration each time you run the generator.

See ruby oar-properties.rb --help for more information.

If you need to add new OAR properties, see `get_node_properties` and `diff_node_properties` in oar-properties/lib/lib-oar-properties.rb.
This script can be tested with the oar-vagrant box (https://github.com/oar-team/oar-vagrant).

See also: 
* https://www.grid5000.fr/mediawiki/index.php/OAR_properties
* https://www.grid5000.fr/mediawiki/index.php/OAR_properties_2.0

Generating the DHCP, DNS, Kadeploy, Conman and Lanpower configurations
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Principles:
* The source code and the templates of the generators are located in the reference-repo in the generators/puppet/ directory.
* Additional configuration files (ex: console passwords, kadeploy tuning options etc.) are located within the puppet-repo in puppet-repo/modules/<module_name>/generators/.
* By default, the output files of the generators are created at /tmp/puppet-repo. It is possible to create them directly at the right place in the puppet-repo directories by passing the option "-o puppet_repo_path" to the generator.
  (ie. you can use git diff to display the changes made by the generators before committing them).

Usage example:

$ (cd /tmp; git clone ssh://g5kadmin@git.grid5000.fr/srv/git/repos/puppet-repo) # or use your existing local copy of the repository
$ cd reference-repo/generators/puppet
$ rake puppet_repo=/tmp/puppet_repo # run every generator and output files to /tmp/puppet_repo

or

$ rake puppet_repo=/tmp/puppet_repo sites=SITE1,SITE2 # run every generator and output files to /tmp/puppet_repo for only SITE1 and SITE2

You also can also run the generators one by one:

$ ruby bindg5k.rb [options]
$ ruby conmang5k.rb [options]
$ ruby dhcpg5k.rb [options]
$ ruby kadeployg5k.rb [options]
$ ruby lanpowerg5k.rb [options]

You can run `ruby %generator%.rb -h` to see available options for a particular generator.

Each generator can be run to generate configuration files for only specified grid5000 sites:
`ruby %generator%.rb -s SITE1,SITE2 [options]`

By default, generators will execute for all sites.

### Configuration directory

lanpowerg5k, conmang5k and kadeployg5k generators require an additional parameter, the path where to find configuration used to generate configuration files:

`ruby %generator%.rb -o puppet_repo_path -c configuration_directory`

It is not mandatory to provide it if the '-o' option is given. In that case, the configuration directory will be set to 'puppet-repo-path/modules/<module_name>/generators/'.

To enable the standalone release of the generators, the conf-examples/ directory includes examples of configuration files and the generators can be run without access to the puppet-repo:

`ruby %generator%.rb -c ./conf-examples/`

### Notes about the conmang5k/lanpowerg5k generators

* The configuration is generated for both the clusters and servers entries of the reference-api.

Example:

sites:
  rennes:
    clusters:
      parapide:
        nodes:
          parapide-[1-25]:
    servers:
      ceph:
        nodes:
          ceph[0-3]:

* The configuration is shared between the module conmang5k and lanpowerg5k
** Passwords are stored in puppet-repo/modules/conmang5k/generators/console-password.yaml
** Additional configuration options are located in puppet-repo/modules/conmang5k/generators/console-password.yaml

### Notes about the kadeplog5k generator

* It generates both the configuration of the kadeploy and kadeploy-dev servers.
* It generates the <site_uid>/clusters.conf and the <site_uid>/<cluster_uid>-clusters.conf files for each sites.
* The template of the <site_uid>/<cluster_uid>-clusters.conf files is located in reference-repo/generators/puppet/templates/kadeployg5k.conf.erb.
  It includes default parameters.
* Cluster specific tuning options are located in puppet-repo/modules/kadeployg5k/generators/kadeployg5k.yaml and kadeployg5k-dev.yaml

### Notes about the DNS and DHCP generators

* Those generators are solely based on the data of the reference API.
* DHCP and DNS entries are generated for nodes (including MIC accelerators), network equipments, pdus and dom0.
  In addition, the DNS also has kavlan entries and the DHCP includes admin laptops.
* The DNS script generates the global-<site_uid>.conf files and the zones/<site_uid>/*.db files.
* DNS CNAME are generated for the main ethernet interface of the nodes.
* DNS entries can be added manually to the configuration:
** A new zone can be added directly to the ./zones/<site_uid>/ directory. Re-run the generator after adding the file to add the zone to the global-<site_uid>.conf files.
** For existing zone, add a ./zones/<site_uid>/<zone_name>-manual.db file and re-run the generator. 
   This file will get included automatically in the generated zone file called ./zones/<site_uid>/<zone_name>.db.
   See bindg5k/files/zones/nancy/ for examples. <zone_name>-manual.db files do no need the usual headers ($TTL directives etc.) of zone files.

How to add a new cluster to Grid'5000
-------------------------------------
The generators can be used to ease the integration of a new cluster to the platform. 

The general idea is to:
- add manually a minimalistic description of the new cluster to the reference-api input files
- use the generators to create the (puppet) configuration files needed to boot the cluster
- enrich the reference-api input files with information retrieved by g5k-checks on the nodes

Detailed steps:
* Manually get the list of node MAC adresses (ex: QR code scan)

* Add the cluster to the reference-api:

See input/grid5000/sites/nancy/clusters/graoully/graoully_ip.yaml.erb as an example for bootstrapping a cluster configuration. Create a similar file for the new cluster. This files includes the ip/mac information that will be used by the configuration file generators.

You don't have to run the reference-api generator yet (generator/reference-api/reference-api.rb) but the cluster information must be available locally in the input directory

* Run the DHCP, Kadeploy, Conman and Lanpower generators:
$ cd generators/puppet
$ puppet_repo=path_to_your_local_puppet_repo rake

* First boot of the cluster :-)

* Retrieve hardware information using g5k-check and add them to the reference repository
$ cd generators/run-g5kchecks; ruby run-g5kchecks.rb -f -s <site_uid> -c <cluster_uid>

* Manually add the information that are not provided by g5k-checks (ex: the main <cluster_uid>.yaml file, PDU information ...). Use graoully.yaml as an example.

Note that it is mandatory to specify some of the network_adapter properties (enabled=true, mountable: true etc.). Those properties are used to detect the name of the main interface (eth0 ? eth1 ?).

You can use the input validator to check the new cluster configuration:
$ cd generators/input-validators; ruby yaml-input-schema-validator.rb

* Run the OAR properties generators. This generator will add the nodes to the OAR configuration.
$ cd generators/oar-properties/
$ ruby oar-properties.rb -s <site_uid> -c <cluster_uid> -d -vv
$ ruby oar-properties.rb -s <site_uid> -c <cluster_uid> -d -e

* Add the cluster to the reference API:
$ cd generator/reference-api; ruby reference-api.rb # and then commit the data/ directory + wait 10-15 minutes

* Boot and check the nodes with g5k-checks

